Runtime release notes for Ballerina Swan Lake Update 10 (#9217)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.10.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

> #### Added shift, unshift, pop and remove operation support to tuples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Added support for the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` functions with tuples

```

Author: Thank you for the suggestions.
Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

> The runtime now supports the shift, unshift, pop and remove operations on tuples similar to how they work on arrays. The necessary checks have been implemented to make sure that the operations will work as expected without causing problems related to mutability and inherent type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime now supports the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` operations on tuples similar to arrays, as long as they do not violate inherent type or mutability constraints.
```

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

> A few examples regarding the use of the operations are given below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are now allowed.

```

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

```ballerina
[int, int...] tuple1 = [1, 2];
int val1 = tuple1.shift();          // 1

[string, string...] tuple2 = ["hello"];
tuple2.unshift("world", "cat");     // ["hello", "world", "cat"]

[int, string, int...] tuple3 = [1, "hello", 4];
var val3 = tuple3.pop();            // 4

[int,string, float...] tuple4 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];
var val4 = tuple4.remove(2);        // 67.5
```

> 

Reviewer: Add an error example too.

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

> ### New Runtime Java APIs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### New runtime Java APIs
```

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

> #### A Runtime Java API to get whether the remote management is enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### A runtime Java API to check if remote management is enabled
```

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

> A new runtime Java API is added to provide information whether the remote management is enabled through a build option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new runtime Java API is added to check if remote management is enabled, via a build option.
```

Author: Fixed with fe2b9b455480bb52a4722bd586efd701df85f10b

```java

> boolean isRemoteEnabled();

Reviewer: Why did we go with isRemoteEnabled, rather than say isRemoteManagamentEnabled or isRemoteMgmtEnabled?

Author: I think @HindujaB should be able to better answer this.

Reviewer: cc @warunalakshitha

Reviewer 2: Considered options like, 
- `isRemoteEnabled`
- `isRemoteMgtEnabled` - we use this name in internal impelementations
- `isRemoteMgmtEnabled`
- `isRemoteManagamentEnabled`
But these seemed like longer names or there's inconsistency in finding the shorten form of `Management` - `mgt` or `mgmt`. 
@warunalakshitha WDYT?

Reviewer: `isRemoteEnabled` doesn't really make sense, does it? Unless users are already familiar, they'll be confused - "remote what is enabled"? 

If `isRemoteManagamentEnabled` is too long, IMO, we can just pick one of `isRemoteMgtEnabled` or `isRemoteMgmtEnabled` and make sure we are consistent with it for whatever future additions/changes.

Reviewer 3: We can go with  isRemoteManagamentEnabled even it is too long. Normally JAva aPIS use Management word instead of short names

Reviewer 3: Some examples https://www.javadoc.io/static/javax.cache/cache-api/1.0.0/javax/cache/configuration/CompleteConfiguration.html#isManagementEnabled()

Reviewer 2: Addressed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/pull/43266
@ravinperera00 we can modify the note accordingly.
```suggestion
boolean isRemoteManagementEnabled();
```

Author: Got it. I'll make the necessary changes.

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

> #### Added support for the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` functions with tuples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Added support for the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` functions with tuples

```

Author: Fixed with 978f9c1b83e79a662502bc2dc14d8ac371386ab3

The runtime now supports the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` operations on tuples similar to arrays, as long as they do not violate inherent type or mutability constraints.

> The following are now allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are now allowed.

```

Author: Fixed with 978f9c1b83e79a662502bc2dc14d8ac371386ab3

```ballerina
[int, int...] tuple1 = [1, 2];
int val1 = tuple1.shift();          // 1

[string, string...] tuple2 = ["hello"];
tuple2.unshift("world", "cat");     // ["hello", "world", "cat"]

[int, string, int...] tuple3 = [1, "hello", 4];
var val3 = tuple3.pop();            // 4

[int,string, float...] tuple4 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];
var val4 = tuple4.remove(2);        // 67.5
```

> The following examples will cause errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples will result in errors.

```

Author: Fixed with 978f9c1b83e79a662502bc2dc14d8ac371386ab3

```ballerina
[int, string...] tuple1 = [1, "hello"];
int val1 = tuple1.shift();          // inherent type violation

[int, int] tuple2 = [1, 2];

> int val2 = tuple2.shift();          // immutable tuple

Reviewer: I don't think "immutable tuple" is correct here, still inherent type violation.

Reviewer: Check the other one too.

By (im)mutabilitity, meant trying to update an immutable value.

Author: You are right. Fixed with 978f9c1b83e79a662502bc2dc14d8ac371386ab3. Thank you for pointing that out.

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

#### Added support for the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` functions with tuples

The runtime now supports the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` operations on tuples similar to arrays, as long as they do not violate inherent type or mutability constraints.

The following are now allowed.

```ballerina
[int, int...] tuple1 = [1, 2];

> int val1 = tuple1.shift();

Reviewer: Here, let's keep the simple comment since it adds value.

```suggestion
int val1 = tuple1.shift(); // 1
```

[int, string, float...] tuple2 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

> int|string|float val2 = tuple2.remove(2);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int|string|float val2 = tuple2.remove(2); // 67.5
```

```

The following examples will result in errors.

```ballerina
[string, string...] tuple1 = ["hello"];

> tuple1.unshift(154);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tuple1.unshift(154); // Compile-time error.
```

[int, string, float...] tuple2 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

> int|string|float val2 = tuple2.remove(1);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int|string|float val2 = tuple2.remove(1); // Panics.
```

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

#### Added support for the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` functions with tuples

The runtime now supports the `shift`, `unshift`, `pop`, and `remove` operations on tuples similar to arrays, as long as they do not violate inherent type or mutability constraints.

The following are now allowed.

```ballerina
[int, int...] tuple1 = [1, 2];
int val1 = tuple1.shift();          // 1

[string, string...] tuple2 = ["hello"];
tuple2.unshift("world", "cat");     // ["hello", "world", "cat"]

[int, string, int...] tuple3 = [1, "hello", 4];

> var val3 = tuple3.pop();            // 4

Author: Thought of keeping the examples simple instead of directing attention to the type of `val3`. The type of `val3` will be inferred anyways when `var` is used right? Can change the type to `int|string` if that is better but for some examples it can be quite long such as `int|string|float`. Can go with `anydata` also.  What do you think?

> var val3 = tuple3.pop();            // 4

Reviewer: I would use the proper union type, even though it may be long, since it gives a better idea of what exactly happens and how type takes into account the different member types of a tuple.

> [int,string, float...] tuple4 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

Author: Will fix this

var val4 = tuple4.remove(2);        // 67.5
```

The following examples will result in errors.

```ballerina
[int, string...] tuple1 = [1, "hello"];

> var val1 = tuple1.shift();          // inherent type violation

Author: Fixed with 13dc4f87c395b8ae0fd7604b282c8a548c4fbafb

[int, int] tuple2 = [1, 2];
var val2 = tuple2.shift();          // inherent type violation

[string, string...] tuple3 = ["hello"];
tuple3.unshift(154);                // inherent type violation

[int, string, int] tuple4 = [1, "hello", 4];
var val4 = tuple4.pop();            // inherent type violation

> [int,string, float...] tuple5 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

Author: Will fix this

> [int,string, float...] tuple5 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

Author: Thought of adding at least one example for each newly added operation (shift, unshift, pop, remove). Can take out examples for some operations if this is too much.

> [int,string, float...] tuple5 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

Reviewer: I think just one or two will convey the idea. Users would generally know functions by name or can check docs.

> [int,string, float...] tuple5 = [7, "hello", 67.5, 89.7];

Author: Got it. I'll reduce the number of examples.

var val5 = tuple5.remove(1);        // inherent type violation
```

> ### New runtime Java APIs

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be 
```suggestion
#### New runtime Java APIs
```

Author: Added this as a separate section because of the presence of a subsection within this which will otherwise be listed as H5 (#####) which sometimes tend to make the subsection title smaller than the body text. But if this should be considered as an "Improvement", can make the appropriate changes.

Reviewer: We generally categorize everything under those three main areas - new features, improvements, and bug fixes (link), so this needs to fit under one of those areas.

Author: In that case, I'll add this under "Improvements". Thank you for the feedback.

#### A runtime Java API to check if remote management is enabled

> A new runtime Java API is added to check if remote management is enabled, via a build option.

Reviewer: remote management is what is enabled via the build option, right?

```suggestion
A new runtime Java API is added to check if remote management is enabled via a build option.
```

Reviewer 2: yes. +1

Author: Fixed with 13dc4f87c395b8ae0fd7604b282c8a548c4fbafb

```java
boolean isRemoteManagementEnabled();
```

> The above API can be called via a Ballerina environment instance as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above API can be called via a Ballerina `Environment` instance as follows.
```

Author: Fixed with 13dc4f87c395b8ae0fd7604b282c8a548c4fbafb
